The dog (Canis familiaris or Canis lupus familiaris) is a
domesticated descendant of the gray wolf. Also called the
domestic dog, it was selectively bred from a population of
wolves during the Late Pleistocene by hunter-gatherers.
The dog was the first species to be domesticated by
humans, over 14,000 years ago and before the
development of agriculture. Due to their long association
with humans, dogs have gained the ability to thrive on a
starch-rich diet that would be inadequate for other canids.
Dogs have been bred for desired behaviors, sensory
capabilities, and physical attributes. Dog breeds vary
widely in shape, size, and color. They have the same
number of bones (with the exception of the tail), powerful
jaws that house around 42 teeth, and well-developed
senses of smell, hearing, and sight. Compared to humans,
dogs possess a superior sense of smell and hearing, but
inferior visual acuity. Dogs perform many roles for
humans, such as hunting, herding, pulling loads,
protection, companionship, therapy, aiding disabled
people, and assisting police and the military.
Communication in dogs includes eye gaze, facial
expression, vocalization, body posture (including
movements of bodies and limbs), and gustatory
communication (scents, pheromones, and taste). They
mark their territories by urinating on them, which is more
likely when entering a new environment. Over the
millennia, dogs have uniquely adapted to human behavior;
this adaptation includes being able to understand and
communicate with humans. As such, the human–canine
bond has been a topic of frequent study, and dogs'
influence on human society has given them the sobriquet
of "man's best friend".
The global dog population is estimated at 700 million to
1 billion, distributed around the world. The dog is the most
popular pet in the United States, present in 34–40% of
households. Developed countries make up approximately 20% of the global dog population, while around 75% of
dogs are estimated to be from developing countries,
mainly in the form of feral and community dogs.

Dogs are domesticated members of the family Canidae.
They are classified as a subspecies of Canis lupus, along
with wolves and dingoes. Dogs were domesticated
from wolves over 14,000 years ago by hunter-gatherers,
before the development of agriculture. The remains of
the Bonn–Oberkassel dog, buried alongside humans
between 14,000 and 15,000 years ago, are the earliest to be
conclusively identified as a domesticated dog. Genetic
studies show that dogs likely diverged from wolves
between 27,000 and 40,000 years ago. The dingo and
the related New Guinea singing dog resulted from the
geographic isolation and feralization of dogs in Oceania
over 8,000 years ago.
Dogs, wolves, and dingoes have sometimes been classified
as separate species. In 1758, the Swedish botanist and
zoologist Carl Linnaeus assigned the genus name Canis
(which is the Latin word for "dog") to the domestic
dog, the wolf, and the golden jackal in his book, Systema
Naturae. He classified the domestic dog as Canis
familiaris and, on the next page, classified the grey wolf as
Canis lupus. Linnaeus considered the dog to be a
separate species from the wolf because of its upturning tail
(cauda recurvata in Latin term), which is not found in any
other canid. In the 2005 edition of Mammal Species of
the World, mammalogist W. Christopher Wozencraft listed
the wolf as a wild subspecies of Canis lupus and proposed
two additional subspecies: familiaris, as named by
Linnaeus in 1758, and dingo, named by Meyer in 1793.
Wozencraft included hallstromi (the New Guinea singing
dog) as another name (junior synonym) for the dingo. This
classification was informed by a 1999 mitochondrial DNA
study.
The classification of dingoes is disputed and a political
issue in Australia. Classifying dingoes as wild dogs
simplifies reducing or controlling dingo populations that
threaten livestock. Treating dingoes as a separate species
allows conservation programs to protect the dingo
population. Dingo classification affects wildlife management policies, legislation, and societal attitudes.
In 2019, a workshop hosted by the IUCN/Species Survival
Commission's Canid Specialist Group considered the
dingo and the New Guinea singing dog to be feral Canis
familiaris. Therefore, it did not assess them for the IUCN
Red List of threatened species.
The earliest remains generally accepted to be those of a
domesticated dog were discovered in Bonn-Oberkassel,
Germany. Contextual, isotopic, genetic, and morphological
evidence shows that this dog was not a local wolf. The
dog was dated to 14,223 years ago and was found buried
along with a man and a woman, all three having been
sprayed with red hematite powder and buried under large,
thick basalt blocks. The dog had died of canine
distemper. This timing indicates that the dog was the
first species to be domesticated in the time of
hunter-gatherers, which predates agriculture. Earlier
remains dating back to 30,000 years ago have been
described as Paleolithic dogs, but their status as dogs or
wolves remains debated because considerable
morphological diversity existed among wolves during the
Late Pleistocene.
DNA sequences show that all ancient and modern dogs
share a common ancestry and descended from an ancient,
extinct wolf population that was distinct from any modern are more closely related to each other than to dogs,
while others have suggested that dogs are more closely
related to modern Eurasian wolves than to American
wolves.
The dog is a domestic animal that likely travelled a
commensal pathway into domestication (i.e. humans initially
neither benefitted nor were harmed by wild dogs eating refuse
from their camps). The questions of when and where
dogs were first domesticated remains uncertain. Genetic
studies suggest a domestication process commencing over
25,000 years ago, in one or several wolf populations in either
Europe, the high Arctic, or eastern Asia. In 2021, a
literature review of the current evidence infers that the dog was domesticated in Siberia 23,000 years ago
by ancient North Siberians, then later dispersed eastward into the Americas and westward across
Eurasia, with dogs likely accompanying the first humans to inhabit the Americas. Some studies
have suggested that the extinct Japanese wolf is closely related to the ancestor of domestic dogs.
In 2018, a study identified 429 genes that differed between modern dogs and modern wolves. As the
differences in these genes could also be found in ancient dog fossils, these were regarded as being the
result of the initial domestication and not from recent breed formation. These genes are linked to neural
crest and central nervous system development. These genes affect embryogenesis and can confer
tameness, smaller jaws, floppy ears, and diminished craniofacial development, which distinguish
domesticated dogs from wolves and are considered to reflect domestication syndrome. The study
concluded that during early dog domestication, the initial selection was for behavior. This trait is
influenced by those genes which act in the neural crest, which led to the phenotypes observed in modern
dogs.
There are around 450 official dog breeds, the most of any mammal. Dogs began diversifying in the
Victorian era, when humans took control of their natural selection. Most breeds were derived from
small numbers of founders within the last 200 years. Since then, dogs have undergone rapid
phenotypic change and have been subjected to artificial selection by humans. The skull, body, and limb
proportions between breeds display more phenotypic diversity than can be found within the entire order
of carnivores. These breeds possess distinct traits related to morphology, which include body size, skull
shape, tail phenotype, fur type, and colour. As such, humans have long used dogs for their desirable
traits to complete or fulfill a certain work or role. Their behavioural traits include guarding, herding,
hunting, retrieving, and scent detection. Their personality traits include hypersocial behavior,
boldness, and aggression. Present-day dogs are dispersed around the world. An example of this
dispersal is the numerous modern breeds of European lineage during the Victorian era.

Dogs are extremely variable in size, ranging from
one of the largest breeds, the Great Dane, at 50 to
79 kg (110 to 174 lb) and 71 to 81 cm (28 to 32 in),
to one of the smallest, the Chihuahua, at 0.5 to 3 kg
(1.1 to 6.6 lb) and 13 to 20 cm (5.1 to 7.9 in).
All healthy dogs, regardless of their size and type,
have the same amount of bones (with the exception
of the tail), although there is significant skeletal
variation between dogs of different types. The
dog's skeleton is well adapted for running; the
vertebrae on the neck and back have extensions for
back muscles, consisting of epaxial muscles and
hypaxial muscles, to connect to; the long ribs
provide room for the heart and lungs; and the
shoulders are unattached to the skeleton, allowing
for flexibility.
Compared to the dog's wolf-like ancestors, selective breeding since domestication has seen the dog's
skeleton increase in size for larger types such as mastiffs and miniaturised for smaller types such as
terriers; dwarfism has been selectively bred for some types where short legs are preferred, such as
dachshunds and corgis. Most dogs naturally have 26 vertebrae in their tails, but some with naturally
short tails have as few as three.

The dog's skull has identical components regardless of breed
type, but there is significant divergence in terms of skull
shape between types. The three basic skull shapes are
the elongated dolichocephalic type as seen in sighthounds, the
intermediate mesocephalic or mesaticephalic type, and the
very short and broad brachycephalic type exemplified by
mastiff type skulls. The jaw contains around 42 teeth,
and it has evolved for the consumption of flesh. Dogs use
their carnassial teeth to cut food into bite-sized chunks, more especially meat

Dogs' senses include vision, hearing, smell, taste, touch, and
magnetoreception. One study suggests that dogs can feel
small variations in Earth's magnetic field. Dogs prefer to
defecate with their spines aligned in a north–south position in
calm magnetic field conditions.
Dogs' vision is dichromatic; their visual world consists of
yellows, blues, and grays. They have difficulty
differentiating between red and green, and much like other
mammals, the dog's eye is composed of two types of cone
cells compared to the human's three. The divergence of the
eye axis of dogs ranges from 12 to 25°, depending on the
breed, which can have different retina configurations.
The fovea centralis area of the eye is attached to a nerve fiber, and is the most sensitive to photons.
Additionally, a study found that dogs' visual acuity was up to eight times less effective than a human, and
their ability to discriminate levels of brightness was about two times worse than a human.
While the human brain is dominated by a large visual cortex, the dog brain is dominated by a large
olfactory cortex. Dogs have roughly forty times more smell-sensitive receptors than humans, ranging
from about 125 million to nearly 300 million in some dog breeds, such as bloodhounds. This sense of
smell is the most prominent sense of the species; it detects chemical changes in the environment,
allowing dogs to pinpoint the location of mating partners, potential stressors, resources, etc. Dogs also
have an acute sense of hearing up to four times greater than that of humans. They can pick up the
slightest sounds from about 400 m (1,300 ft) compared to 90 m (300 ft) for humans.
Dogs have stiff, deeply embedded hairs known as whiskers that sense atmospheric changes, vibrations,
and objects not visible in low light conditions. The lower most part of whiskers hold more receptor cells
than other hair types, which help in alerting dogs of objects that could collide with the nose, ears, and
jaw. Whiskers likely also facilitate the movement of food towards the mouth.
The coats of domestic dogs are of two varieties: "double" being common in dogs (as well as wolves)
originating from colder climates, made up of a coarse guard hair and a soft down hair, or "single", with
the topcoat only. Breeds may have an occasional "blaze", stripe, or "star" of white fur on their chest or
impulsive behaviors, anxiety behaviors, and fear of unfamiliar noise, people, or animals. Some dog
breeds are hairless, while others have a very thick corded coat. The coats of certain breeds are often
groomed to a characteristic style, for example, the Yorkshire Terrier's "show cut".
A dog's dewclaw is the fifth digit in its forelimb and hind legs. Dewclaws on the forelimbs are attached
by bone and ligament, while the dewclaws on the hind legs are attached only by skin. Most dogs are not
born with dewclaws in their hind legs, and some are without them in their forelimbs. Dogs' dewclaws
consist of the proximal phalanges and distal phalanges. Some publications theorize that dewclaws in
wolves, who usually do not have dewclaws, were a sign of hybridization with dogs.
A dog's tail is the terminal appendage of the vertebral column, which is made up of a string of 5 to 23
vertebrae enclosed in muscles and skin that support the dog's back extensor muscles. One of the primary
functions of a dog's tail is to communicate their emotional state. The tail also helps the dog maintain
balance by putting its weight on the opposite side of the dog's tilt, and it can also help the dog spread its
anal gland's scent through the tail's position and movement. Dogs can have a violet gland (or
supracaudal gland) characterized by sebaceous glands on the dorsal surface of their tails; in some breeds,
it may be vestigial or absent. The enlargement of the violet gland in the tail, which can create a bald spot
from hair loss, can be caused by Cushing's disease or an excess of sebum from androgens in the
sebaceous glands.
A study suggests that dogs show asymmetric tail-wagging
responses to different emotive stimuli. "Stimuli that could be
expected to elicit approach tendencies seem to be associated
with [a] higher amplitude of tail-wagging movements to the
right side". Dogs can injure themselves by wagging
their tails forcefully; this condition is called kennel tail, happy
tail, bleeding tail, or splitting tail. In some hunting dogs,
the tail is traditionally docked to avoid injuries. Some dogs
can be born without tails because of a DNA variant in the T
gene, which can also result in a congenitally short (bobtail)
tail. Tail docking is opposed by many veterinary and
animal welfare organisations such as the American Veterinary
Medical Association and the British Veterinary
Association. Evidence from veterinary practices and
questionnaires showed that around 500 dogs would need to have their tail docked to prevent one
injury.
can acquire upper respiratory tract diseases including diseases that affect the nasal cavity, the larynx, and
the trachea; lower respiratory tract diseases which includes pulmonary disease and acute respiratory
diseases; heart diseases which includes any cardiovascular inflammation or dysfunction of the heart;
haemopoietic diseases including anaemia and clotting disorders; gastrointestinal disease such as diarrhoea
and gastric dilatation volvulus; hepatic disease such as portosystemic shunts and liver failure; pancreatic
disease such as pancreatitis; renal disease; lower urinary tract disease such as cystitis and urolithiasis;
endocrine disorders such as diabetes mellitus, Cushing's syndrome, hypoadrenocorticism, and
hypothyroidism; nervous system diseases such as seizures and spinal injury; musculoskeletal disease such
as arthritis and myopathies; dermatological disorders such as alopecia and pyoderma; ophthalmological
diseases such as conjunctivitis, glaucoma, entropion, and progressive retinal atrophy; and neoplasia.
Common dog parasites are lice, fleas, fly larvae, ticks, mites, cestodes, nematodes, and coccidia. Taenia is
a notable genus with 5 species in which dogs are the definitive host. Additionally, dogs are a source of
zoonoses for humans. They are responsible for 99% of rabies cases worldwide; however, in some
developed countries such as the UK, rabies is absent from dogs and is instead only transmitted by
bats. Other common zoonoses are hydatid disease, leptospirosis, pasteurellosis, ringworm, and
toxocariasis. Common infections in dogs include canine adenovirus, canine distemper virus, canine
parvovirus, leptospirosis, canine influenza, and canine coronavirus. All of these conditions have vaccines
available.
Dogs are the companion animal most frequently reported for exposure to toxins. Most poisonings are
accidental and over 80% of reports of exposure to the ASPCA animal poisoning hotline are due to oral
exposure. The most common substances people report exposure to are: pharmaceuticals, toxic foods, and
rodenticides. Data from the Pet Poison Helpline shows that human drugs are the most frequent cause
of toxicosis death. The most common household products ingested are cleaning products. Most food
related poisonings involved theobromine poisoning (chocolate). Other common food poisonings include
xylitol, Vitis (grapes, raisins, etc.), and Allium (garlic, onions, etc.). Pyrethrin insecticides were the most
common cause of pesticide poisoning. Metaldehyde, a common pesticide for snails and slugs, typically
causes severe outcomes when ingested by dogs.
Neoplasia is the most common cause of death for dogs. Other common causes of death are
heart and renal failure. Their pathology is similar to that of humans, as is their response to treatment
and their outcomes. Genes found in humans to be responsible for disorders are investigated in dogs as
being the cause and vice versa.
The typical lifespan of dogs varies widely among breeds, but the median longevity (the age at which half
the dogs in a population have died and half are still alive) is approximately 12.7 years. Obesity
correlates negatively with longevity with one study finding obese dogs to have a life expectancy
approximately a year and a half less than dogs with a healthy weight.
Health
Lifespan
Two dogs tied after mating
In a 2024 UK study analyzing 584,734 dogs, it was concluded that purebred dogs lived longer than
crossbred dogs, challenging the previous notion of the latter having the higher life expectancies. The
authors noted that their study included "designer dogs" as crossbred and that purebred dogs were
typically given better care than their crossbred counterparts, which likely influenced the outcome of the
study. Other studies also show that fully mongrel dogs live about a year longer on average than dogs
with pedigrees. Furthermore, small dogs with longer muzzles have been shown to have higher
lifespans than larger medium-sized dogs with much more depressed muzzles. For free-ranging dogs,
less than 1 in 5 reach sexual maturity, and the median life expectancy for feral dogs is less than half of
dogs living with humans.
In domestic dogs, sexual maturity happens around six months
to one year for both males and females, although this can be
delayed until up to two years of age for some large breeds.
This is the time at which female dogs will have their first
estrous cycle, characterized by their vulvas swelling and
producing discharges, usually lasting between 4 and 20
days. They will experience subsequent estrous cycles
semiannually, during which the body prepares for pregnancy.
At the peak of the cycle, females will become estrous,
mentally and physically receptive to copulation. Because the
ova survive and can be fertilized for a week after ovulation, more than one male can sire the same
litter. Fertilization typically occurs two to five days after ovulation. After ejaculation, the dogs are
coitally tied for around 5–30 minutes because of the male's bulbus glandis swelling and the female's
constrictor vestibuli contracting; the male will continue ejaculating until they untie naturally due to
muscle relaxation. 14–16 days after ovulation, the embryo attaches to the uterus, and after seven to
eight more days, a heartbeat is detectable. Dogs bear their litters roughly 58 to 68 days after
fertilization, with an average of 63 days, although the length of gestation can vary. An average
litter consists of about six puppies.
Neutering is the sterilization of animals via gonadectomy, which is an orchidectomy (castration) in dogs
and ovariohysterectomy (spay) in bitches. Neutering reduces problems caused by hypersexuality,
especially in male dogs. Spayed females are less likely to develop cancers affecting the mammary
glands, ovaries, and other reproductive organs. However, neutering increases the risk of urinary
incontinence in bitches, prostate cancer in dogs, and osteosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, cruciate
ligament rupture, pyometra, obesity, and diabetes mellitus in either sex.
Neutering is the most common surgical procedure in dogs less than a year old in the US and is seen as a
control method for overpopulation. Neutering often occurs as early as 6–14 weeks in shelters in the
US. The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) advises that dogs not
intended for further breeding should be neutered so that they do not have undesired puppies that may later
be euthanized. However, the Society for Theriogenology and the American College of
Theriogenologists made a joint statement that opposes mandatory neutering; they said that the cause of
overpopulation in the US is cultural.
Neutering is less common in most European countries, especially in Nordic countries—except for the
UK, where it is common. In Norway, neutering is illegal unless for the benefit of the animal's health (e.g.,
ovariohysterectomy in case of ovarian or uterine neoplasia). Some European countries have similar laws
to Norway, but their wording either explicitly allows for neutering for controlling reproduction or it is
allowed in practice or by contradiction through other laws. Italy and Portugal have passed recent laws
that promote it. Germany forbids early age neutering, but neutering is still allowed at the usual age. In
Romania, neutering is mandatory except for when a pedigree to select breeds can be shown.
A common breeding practice for pet dogs is to mate them between close relatives (e.g., between half- and
full-siblings). In a study of seven dog breeds (the Bernese Mountain Dog, Basset Hound, Cairn
Terrier, Brittany, German Shepherd Dog, Leonberger, and West Highland White Terrier), it was found that
inbreeding decreases litter size and survival. Another analysis of data on 42,855 Dachshund litters
found that as the inbreeding coefficient increased, litter size decreased and the percentage of stillborn
puppies increased, thus indicating inbreeding depression. In a study of Boxer litters, 22% of puppies
died before reaching 7 weeks of age. Stillbirth was the most frequent cause of death, followed by
infection. Mortality due to infection increased significantly with increases in inbreeding.
Dog behavior has been shaped by millennia of contact with humans. They have acquired the ability to
understand and communicate with humans and are uniquely attuned to human behaviors.
Behavioral scientists suggest that a set of social-cognitive abilities in domestic dogs that are not
possessed by the dog's canine relatives or other highly intelligent mammals, such as great apes, are
parallel to children's social-cognitive skills. Dogs have about twice the number of neurons in their
cerebral cortexes than what cats have, which suggests they could be about twice as intelligent.
Most domestic animals were initially bred for the production of goods. Dogs, on the other hand, were
selectively bred for desirable behavioral traits. In 2016, a study found that only 11 fixed genes
showed variation between wolves and dogs. These gene variations indicate the occurrence of
artificial selection and the subsequent divergence of behavior and anatomical features. These genes have
been shown to affect the catecholamine synthesis pathway, with the majority of the genes affecting the
fight-or-flight response (i.e., selection for tameness) and emotional processing. Compared to
their wolf counterparts, dogs tend to be less timid and less aggressive, though some of these genes have
been associated with aggression in certain dog breeds. Traits of high sociability and lack of fear
in dogs may include genetic modifications related to Williams-Beuren syndrome in humans, which cause
hypersociability at the expense of problem-solving ability. In a 2023 study of 58 dogs, some dogs
classified as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder-like showed lower serotonin and dopamine
concentrations. A similar study claims that hyperactivity is more common in male and young
dogs. A dog can become aggressive because of trauma or abuse, fear or anxiety, territorial protection,
or protecting an item it considers valuable. Acute stress reactions from post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) seen in dogs can evolve into chronic stress. Police dogs with PTSD can often refuse to
work.
term is chiefly used to describe training dogs' habits)
which can be influenced by breeding. These instincts
can drive dogs to consider objects or other animals to
be prey or drive possessive behavior. These traits have
been enhanced in some breeds so that they may be
used to hunt and kill vermin or other pests.
Puppies or dogs sometimes bury food underground.
One study found that wolves outperformed dogs in
finding food caches, likely due to a "difference in
motivation" between wolves and dogs. Some
puppies and dogs engage in coprophagy out of habit, stress, for attention, or boredom; most of them will
not do it later in life. A study hypothesizes that the behavior was inherited from wolves, a behavior likely
evolved to lessen the presence of intestinal parasites in dens. Most dogs can swim. In a study of 412
dogs, around 36.5% of the dogs could not swim; the other 63.5% were able to swim without a trainer in a
swimming pool. A study of 55 dogs found a correlation between swimming and 'improvement' of the
hip osteoarthritis joint.
The female dog may produce colostrum, a type of
milk high in nutrients and antibodies, 1–7 days before
giving birth. Milk production lasts for around three
months, and increases with litter size.
The dog can sometimes vomit and refuse food during
child contractions. In the later stages of the dog's
pregnancy, nesting behaviour may occur. Puppies
are born with a protective fetal membrane that the
mother usually removes shortly after birth. Dogs can
have the maternal instincts to start grooming their
puppies, consume their puppies' feces, and protect
their puppies, likely due to their hormonal
state. While male-parent dogs can show more
disinterested behaviour toward their own puppies, most can play with the young pups as they would
with other dogs or humans. A female dog may abandon or attack her puppies or her male partner dog
if she is stressed or in pain.
Researchers have tested dogs' ability to perceive information, retain it as knowledge, and apply it to solve
problems. Studies of two dogs suggest that dogs can learn by inference. A study with Rico, a Border
Collie, showed that he knew the labels of over 200 different items. He inferred the names of novel things
by exclusion learning and correctly retrieved those new items after four weeks of the initial exposure. A
study of another Border Collie, Chaser, documented that he had learned the names and could associate
them by verbal command with over 1,000 words.
One study of canine cognitive abilities found that dogs' capabilities are similar to those of horses,
chimpanzees, or cats. One study of 18 household dogs found that the dogs could not distinguish food
bowls at specific locations without distinguishing cues; the study stated that this indicates a lack of spatial
memory. A study stated that dogs have a visual sense for number. The dogs showed a ratio-dependent
activation both for numerical values from 1–3 to larger than four.
Dogs demonstrate a theory of mind by engaging in deception. Another experimental study showed
evidence that Australian dingos can outperform domestic dogs in non-social problem-solving, indicating
that domestic dogs may have lost much of their original problem-solving abilities once they joined
humans. Another study showed that dogs stared at humans after failing to complete an impossible
version of the same task they had been trained to solve. Wolves, under the same situation, avoided staring
at humans altogether.