Germany, officially the Federal Republic of
Germany, is a country in Central Europe. It lies
between the Baltic Sea and the North Sea to the north
and the Alps to the south. Its sixteen constituent states
have a total population of over 84 million in an area of
357,596 km2 (138,069 sq mi), making it the most
populous member state of the European Union. It
borders Denmark to the north, Poland and the Czech
Republic to the east, Austria and Switzerland to the
south, and France, Luxembourg, Belgium, and the
Netherlands to the west. The nation's capital and most
populous city is Berlin and its main financial centre is
Frankfurt; the largest urban area is the Ruhr.
Settlement in the territory of modern Germany began
in the Lower Paleolithic, with various tribes inhabiting
it from the Neolithic onward, chiefly the Celts. Various
Germanic tribes have inhabited the northern parts of
modern Germany since classical antiquity. A region
named Germania was documented before AD 100. In
962, the Kingdom of Germany formed the bulk of the
Holy Roman Empire. During the 16th century,
northern German regions became the centre of the
Protestant Reformation. Following the Napoleonic
Wars and the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in
1806, the German Confederation was formed in 1815.
Formal unification of Germany into the modern nationstate
commenced on 18 August 1866 with the North
German Confederation Treaty establishing the Prussialed
North German Confederation, which became the
German Empire in 1871. After World War I and the
German Revolution of 1918–1919, the Empire was
replaced by the Weimar Republic. The Nazi rise to
power in 1933 led to the establishment of a totalitarian
dictatorship, World War II, and the Holocaust. In 1949,
after the war and a period of Allied occupation,
Germany was organised into two separate polities with
limited sovereignty: the Federal Republic of Germany,
or West Germany, and the German Democratic
Republic, or East Germany. Berlin continued its de jure Four Power status. The Federal Republic of
Germany was a founding member of the Council of
Europe, the European Economic Community and the
European Union in 1951, while the German
Democratic Republic was a communist Eastern Bloc
state and member of the Warsaw Pact. After the fall of
the communist led-government in East Germany,
German reunification saw the former East German
states join the Federal Republic of Germany on 3
October 1990.
Germany is a developed country with a strong
economy; it has the largest economy in Europe by
nominal GDP. As a major force in several industrial,
scientific and technological sectors, it is both the
world's third-largest exporter and importer. It offers
social security, a universal health care system, and
tuition-free university education. Germany is part of
multiple international organisations and forums. It has
the third-highest number of UNESCO World Heritage
Sites: 54, of which 51 are cultural.

The English word Germany derives from the Latin
Germania, which came into use after Julius Caesar
adopted it for the peoples east of the Rhine. The
German term Deutschland, originally diutisciu land
('the German lands'), is derived from deutsch (cf.
Dutch), which descended from Old High German
diutisc 'of the people' (from diot or diota 'people'),
originally used to distinguish the language of the
common people from Latin and its Romance
descendants. This in turn descends from Proto-
Germanic *þiudiskaz 'of the people' (see also the
Latinised form Theodiscus), derived from *þeudō,
descended from Proto-Indo-European *tewtéh₂-
'people', from which the word Teutons also
originates.

Pre-human ancestors, the Danuvius guggenmosi, who were present in Germany over 11 million years
ago, are theorised to be among the earliest ones to walk on two legs. Ancient humans were present in
Germany at least 600,000 years ago. The first non-modern human fossil (the Neanderthal) was
discovered in the Neander Valley. Similarly dated evidence of modern humans has been found in the
Swabian Jura, including 42,000-year-old flutes which are the oldest musical instruments ever found,
the 40,000-year-old Lion Man, and the 41,000-year-old Venus of Hohle Fels.
The Germanic peoples are thought to have emerged from the
Jastorf culture during the Nordic Bronze Age or early Iron
Age. From southern Scandinavia and northern
Germany, they expanded south, east, and west, coming into
contact with the Celtic, Iranian, Baltic, and Slavic
tribes. Southern Germany was inhabited by Celticspeaking
peoples, who belonged to the wider La Tène culture.
They were later assimilated by the Germanic conquerors.
Under Augustus, the Roman Empire began to invade lands
inhabited by the Germanic tribes, creating a short-lived
Roman province of Germania between the Rhine and Elbe
rivers. In 9 AD, three Roman legions were defeated by Arminius in the Battle of the Teutoburg
Forest. The outcome of this battle dissuaded the Romans from their ambition of conquering
Germania and is thus considered one of the most important events in European history. By 100 AD,
when Tacitus wrote Germania, Germanic tribes had settled along the Rhine and the Danube (the Limes
Germanicus), occupying most of modern Germany. However, Baden-Württemberg, southern Bavaria,
southern Hesse and the western Rhineland had been incorporated into Roman provinces.
Around 260, Germanic peoples broke into Roman-controlled lands. After the invasion of the Huns in
375, and with the decline of Rome from 395, Germanic tribes moved farther southwest: the Franks
established the Frankish Kingdom and pushed east to subjugate Saxony and Bavaria. Areas of modern
eastern Germany were inhabited by Western Slavic tribes.
Charlemagne founded the Carolingian Empire in 800; it was divided in 843. The eastern successor
kingdom of East Francia stretched from the Rhine in the west to the Elbe river in the east and from the
North Sea to the Alps. Subsequently, the Holy Roman Empire emerged from it. The Ottonian rulers
(919–1024) consolidated several major duchies. In 996, Gregory V became the first German Pope, appointed by his cousin Otto III, whom he shortly after
crowned Holy Roman Emperor. The Holy Roman Empire
absorbed northern Italy and Burgundy under the Salian
emperors (1024–1125), although the emperors lost power
through the Investiture Controversy.
Under the Hohenstaufen emperors (1138–1254), German
princes encouraged German settlement to the south and east
(Ostsiedlung). Members of the Hanseatic League, mostly
north German towns, prospered in the expansion of trade.
The population declined starting with the Great Famine in
1315, followed by the Black Death of 1348–1350. The
Golden Bull issued in 1356 provided the constitutional structure of the
Empire and codified the election of the emperor by seven princeelectors.[
40]
Johannes Gutenberg introduced moveable-type printing to Europe,
laying the basis for the democratisation of knowledge. In 1517,
Martin Luther incited the Protestant Reformation and his translation of
the Bible began the standardisation of the language; the 1555 Peace of
Augsburg tolerated the "Evangelical" faith (Lutheranism), but also
decreed that the faith of the prince was to be the faith of his subjects
(cuius regio, eius religio). From the Cologne War through the Thirty
Years' Wars (1618–1648), religious conflict devastated German lands
and significantly reduced the population.
The Peace of Westphalia ended religious warfare among the Imperial
Estates. The legal system initiated by a series of Imperial Reforms
(approximately 1495–1555) provided for considerable local autonomy
and a stronger Imperial Diet. The House of Habsburg held the
imperial crown from 1438 until the death of Charles VI in 1740.
Following the War of the Austrian Succession and the Treaty of Aix-la-
Chapelle, Charles VI's daughter Maria Theresa ruled as empress
consort when her husband, Francis I, became emperor.
From 1740, dualism between the Austrian Habsburg monarchy and the Kingdom of Prussia dominated
German history. In 1772, 1793, and 1795, Prussia and Austria, along with the Russian Empire, agreed to
the Partitions of Poland. During the period of the French Revolutionary Wars, the Napoleonic era
and the subsequent final meeting of the Imperial Diet, most of the Free Imperial Cities were annexed by
dynastic territories; the ecclesiastical territories were secularised and annexed. In 1806 the Imperium was
dissolved; France, Russia, Prussia, and the Habsburgs (Austria) competed for hegemony in the German
states during the Napoleonic Wars.
Following the fall of Napoleon, the Congress of Vienna
founded the German Confederation, a loose league of 39
sovereign states. The appointment of the emperor of Austria
as the permanent president reflected the Congress's rejection
of Prussia's rising influence. Disagreement within restoration
politics partly led to the rise of liberal movements, followed
by new measures of repression by Austrian statesman
Klemens von Metternich. The Zollverein, a tariff
union, furthered economic unity. In light of revolutionary
movements in Europe, intellectuals and commoners started
the revolutions of 1848 in the German states, raising the
German question. King Frederick William IV of Prussia was
offered the title of emperor, but with a loss of power; he
rejected the crown and the proposed constitution, a temporary
setback for the movement.
King William I appointed Otto von Bismarck as the Minister
President of Prussia in 1862. Bismarck successfully
concluded the war with Denmark in 1864; the subsequent
decisive Prussian victory in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866
enabled him to create the North German Confederation which
excluded Austria. After the defeat of France in the Franco-
Prussian War, the German princes proclaimed the founding of
the German Empire in 1871. Prussia was the dominant
constituent state of the new empire; the King of Prussia ruled
as its Kaiser, and Berlin became its capital.
In the Gründerzeit period following the unification of
Germany, Bismarck's foreign policy as chancellor of Germany secured Germany's position as a great
nation by forging alliances and avoiding war. However, under Wilhelm II, Germany took an
imperialistic course, leading to friction with neighbouring countries. A dual alliance was created with
the multinational realm of Austria-Hungary; the Triple Alliance of 1882 included Italy. Britain, France
and Russia also concluded alliances to protect against Habsburg interference with Russian interests in the
Balkans or German interference against France. At the Berlin Conference in 1884, Germany claimed
several colonies including German East Africa, German South West Africa, Togoland, and Kamerun.
Later, Germany further expanded its colonial empire to include holdings in the Pacific and China. The
colonial government in South West Africa (present-day Namibia), from 1904 to 1908, carried out the
annihilation of the local Herero and Nama peoples as punishment for an uprising; this was the
20th century's first genocide.
The assassination of Austria's crown prince on 28 June 1914 provided the pretext for Austria-Hungary to
attack Serbia and trigger World War I. After four years of warfare, in which approximately two million
German soldiers were killed, a general armistice ended the fighting. In the German Revolution
(November 1918), Wilhelm II and the ruling princes abdicated their positions, and Germany was declared
a federal republic. Germany's new leadership signed the Treaty of Versailles in 1919, accepting defeat by the Allies. Germans perceived the treaty as humiliating, which was seen by historians as influential in the
rise of Adolf Hitler. Germany lost around 13% of its European territory and ceded all of its colonial
possessions in Africa and the Pacific.

On 11 August 1919, President Friedrich Ebert signed the democratic
Weimar Constitution. Communists briefly seized power in Bavaria
and a few larger cities, while conservative elements failed to overthrow
the central government in the 1920 Kapp Putsch. The occupation of the
Ruhr by Belgian and French troops and a period of hyperinflation
followed. A plan to restructure Germany's war reparations and the
creation of a new currency in 1924 helped stabilise the government and
ushered in the Golden Twenties, an era of artistic innovation and liberal
cultural life.
The worldwide Great Depression hit Germany in 1929, and by 1932
the unemployment rate had risen to 24%. The Nazi Party led by
Adolf Hitler became the largest party in the Reichstag after the election
of July 1932, and President Hindenburg appointed Hitler chancellor on
30 January 1933. After the Reichstag fire, a decree abrogated basic
civil rights, and the first Nazi concentration camp opened. On 23
March 1933, the Enabling Act gave Hitler unrestricted legislative
power, overriding the constitution, and marked the beginning of Nazi Germany. His government
established a centralised totalitarian state, withdrew from the League of Nations, and dramatically
increased the country's rearmament. A government-sponsored programme for economic renewal
focused on public works, the most famous of which was the Autobahn.
In 1935, the regime withdrew from the Treaty of Versailles and introduced the Nuremberg Laws which
targeted Jews and other minorities. Germany also reacquired control of the Saarland in 1935,
remilitarised the Rhineland in 1936, annexed Austria in 1938, annexed the Sudetenland in 1938 with the
Munich Agreement, and, in violation of the agreement, occupied Czechoslovakia in March 1939.
Kristallnacht (Night of Broken Glass) saw the burning of synagogues, the destruction of Jewish
businesses, and mass arrests of Jewish people.
In August 1939, Hitler's government negotiated the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact that divided Eastern
Europe into German and Soviet spheres of influence. On 1 September 1939, Germany invaded
Poland, beginning World War II in Europe; Britain and France declared war on Germany on 3
September. In the spring of 1940, Germany conquered Denmark and Norway, the Netherlands,
Belgium, Luxembourg, and France, forcing the French government to sign an armistice. The British
repelled German air attacks in the Battle of Britain in the same year. In 1941, German troops invaded
Yugoslavia, Greece and the Soviet Union. By 1942, Germany and its allies controlled most of continental
Europe and North Africa, but following the Soviet victory at the Battle of Stalingrad, the Allied
reconquest of North Africa and invasion of Italy in 1943, German forces suffered repeated military
defeats. In 1944, the Soviets pushed into Eastern Europe; the Western allies landed in France and entered
Germany despite a final German counteroffensive. Following Hitler's suicide during the Battle of Berlin,
Germany signed the surrender document on 8 May 1945, ending World War II in Europe and Nazi
Germany. Following the end of the war, surviving Nazi officials were tried for war crimes at the
Nuremberg trials.
In what later became known as the Holocaust, the German government persecuted minorities, including
interning them in concentration and death camps across Europe. The regime systematically murdered
around 6 million Jews, at least 130,000 Romani, 275,000 disabled, thousands of Jehovah's Witnesses,
thousands of homosexuals, and hundreds of thousands of political and religious opponents. Nazi
policies in German-occupied countries resulted in the deaths of an estimated 2.7 million Poles,
1.3 million Ukrainians, 1 million Belarusians and 3.5 million Soviet prisoners of war. German
military casualties have been estimated at 5.3 million, and around 900,000 German civilians died.
Around 12 million ethnic Germans were expelled from across Eastern Europe, and Germany lost roughly
one-quarter of its pre-war territory.
After the surrender of Nazi Germany, the Allies de jure
abolished the German state and partitioned Berlin and
Germany's remaining territory into four occupation zones.
The western sectors, controlled by France, the United
Kingdom, and the United States, were merged on 23 May
1949 to form the Federal Republic of Germany (German:
Bundesrepublik Deutschland); on 7 October 1949, the Soviet
Zone became the German Democratic Republic (GDR)
(Deutsche Demokratische Republik; DDR). They were
informally known as West Germany and East Germany.
East Germany selected East Berlin as its capital, while West
Germany chose Bonn as a provisional capital, to emphasise
its stance that the two-state solution was temporary.
West Germany was established as a federal parliamentary
republic with a social market economy. In 1948, West Germany became a major recipient of
reconstruction aid under the American Marshall Plan. Konrad Adenauer was elected the first federal
chancellor of Germany in 1949. The country enjoyed prolonged economic growth (Wirtschaftswunder)
beginning in the early 1950s. West Germany joined NATO in 1955 and was a founding member of the
European Economic Community. On 1 January 1957, the Saarland joined West Germany.
East Germany was an Eastern Bloc state under political and military control by the Soviet Union via
occupation forces and the Warsaw Pact. Although East Germany claimed to be a democracy, political
power was exercised solely by leading members (Politbüro) of the communist-controlled Socialist Unity
Party of Germany, supported by the Stasi, an immense secret service. While East German
propaganda was based on the benefits of the GDR's social programmes and the alleged threat of a West
German invasion, many of its citizens looked to the West for freedom and prosperity. The Berlin
Wall, built in 1961, prevented East German citizens from escaping to West Germany, becoming a symbol
of the Cold War.
Tensions between East and West Germany were reduced in the late 1960s by Chancellor Willy Brandt's
Ostpolitik. In 1989, Hungary decided to dismantle the Iron Curtain and open its border with Austria,
causing the emigration of thousands of East Germans to West Germany via Hungary and Austria. This
had devastating effects on the GDR, where regular mass demonstrations received increasing support. In
an effort to help retain East Germany as a state, the East German authorities eased border restrictions, but
this actually led to an acceleration of the Wende reform process culminating in the Two Plus Four Treaty
under which Germany regained full sovereignty. This permitted German reunification on 3 October 1990,
with the accession of the five re-established states of the former GDR. The fall of the Berlin Wall in
1989 became a symbol of the Fall of Communism, the dissolution of the Soviet Union, German
reunification and Die Wende ("the turning point").
United Germany was considered the enlarged continuation of
West Germany, so it retained its memberships in international
organisations. Based on the Berlin/Bonn Act (1994),
Berlin again became the capital of Germany, while Bonn
obtained the unique status of a Bundesstadt (federal city),
retaining some federal ministries. The relocation of the
government was completed in 1999, and modernisation
of the East German economy was scheduled to last until
2019.
Since reunification, Germany has taken a more active role in the European Union, signing the Maastricht
Treaty in 1992 and the Lisbon Treaty in 2007, and co-founding the eurozone. Germany sent a
peacekeeping force to secure stability in the Balkans and sent German troops to Afghanistan as part of a
NATO effort to provide security in that country after the ousting of the Taliban.
In the 2005 elections, Angela Merkel became the first female chancellor. In 2009, the German
government approved a €50 billion stimulus plan. Among the major German political projects of the
early 21st century are the advancement of European integration, the energy transition (Energiewende) for
a sustainable energy supply, the debt brake for balanced budgets, measures to increase the fertility rate
(pronatalism), and high-tech strategies for the transition of the German economy, summarised as Industry
4.0. During the 2015 European migrant crisis, the country took in over a million refugees and
migrants.
Germany is the seventh-largest country in Europe. It borders Denmark to the north, Poland and the
Czech Republic to the east, Austria and Switzerland to the south, and France, Luxembourg, Belgium, and
the Netherlands to the west. Germany is also bordered by the North Sea and, at the north-northeast, by the
Baltic Sea. German territory covers 357,596 km2 (138,069 sq mi). Elevation ranges from the mountains
of the Alps (highest point: the Zugspitze at 2,963 metres or 9,721 feet) in the south to the shores of the
North Sea (Nordsee) in the northwest and the Baltic Sea (Ostsee) in the northeast. The forested uplands of
central Germany and the lowlands of northern Germany (lowest point: in the municipality Neuendorf-Sachsenbande, Wilstermarsch at 3.54 metres or 11.6 feet
below sea level) are traversed by such major rivers as the
Rhine, Danube and Elbe. Significant natural resources include
iron ore, coal, potash, timber, lignite, uranium, copper, natural
gas, salt, and nickel.
Most of Germany has a temperate climate, ranging from
oceanic in the north and west to continental in the east and
southeast. Winters range from the cold in the Southern Alps to
cool and are generally overcast with limited precipitation,
while summers can vary from hot and dry to cool and rainy.
The northern regions have prevailing westerly winds that
bring in moist air from the North Sea, moderating the
temperature and increasing precipitation. Conversely, the
southeast regions have more extreme temperatures.
From February 2019–February 2020, average monthly
temperatures in Germany ranged from a low of 3.3 °C (37.9 °F) in January 2020 to a high of 19.8 °C
(67.6 °F) in June 2019. Average monthly precipitation ranged from 30 litres per square metre in
February and April 2019 to 125 litres per square metre in February 2020. Average monthly hours of
sunshine ranged from 45 in November 2019 to 300 in June 2019.
Climate change in Germany is leading to long-term impacts on agriculture, more intense heat waves and
cold waves, flash and coastal flooding, and reduced water availability. Climate change could cost
Germany up to €900 billion by 2050.
The territory of Germany can be divided into five terrestrial
ecoregions: Atlantic mixed forests, Baltic mixed forests,
Central European mixed forests, Western European broadleaf
forests, and Alps conifer and mixed forests. As of 2016,
51% of Germany's land area is devoted to agriculture, while
30% is forested and 14% is covered by settlements or
infrastructure.
Plants and animals include those generally common to
Central Europe. According to the National Forest Inventory,
beeches, oaks, and other deciduous trees constitute just over
40% of the forests; roughly 60% are conifers, particularly
spruce and pine. There are many species of ferns, flowers, fungi, and mosses. Wild animals include
roe deer, wild boar, mouflon (a subspecies of wild sheep), fox, badger, hare, and small numbers of the
Eurasian beaver. The blue cornflower was once a German national symbol. The 16 national parks in Germany include the Jasmund National Park, the Vorpommern Lagoon Area
National Park, the Müritz National Park, the Wadden Sea National Parks, the Harz National Park, the
Hainich National Park, the Black Forest National Park, the Saxon Switzerland National Park, the
Bavarian Forest National Park and the Berchtesgaden National Park. In addition, there are 17
Biosphere Reserves, and 105 nature parks. More than 400 zoos and animal parks operate in
Germany. The Berlin Zoo, which opened in 1844, is the oldest in Germany, and claims the most
comprehensive collection of species in the world.